The goal is to capture your opponent's general. A general is a special piece
which can move and fight, but has no ability to hide. A general has little
armor and fairly ineffectual weapons.

An army is made up of 'units', each of which can be moved independently. Any
unit includes the soldiers necessary to operate it.

Each type of unit has certain characteristics that may affect how it is used:

Armor 		- on a scale of 1 to 100, how well armored is it?
Weapon strength - on a scale of 1 to 100, how strong is its weapon?
Weapon Range	- How far can its weapon reach?
Accuracy	- How accurate is the weapon?
Speed 		- How far can it go in a unit of time?
Stealth		- on a scale of 1 to 100, how hard is it to see?
Vision		- how far can it see?
Cost 		- How much does it cost to buy?
Fuel Capacity	- How much fuel can it hold?
Range		- How far can it go without refueling?
Airborne	- Is it an aircraft?

All units of the same type will have the same values for these characteristics.

In addition, each individual unit has several characteristics that may change
over time, as the game progresses:

Health		- on a scale of 1 to 100, how healty is this unit?
Fuel		- How much fuel remains?
Camo		- Is the unit camoflaged at this time?
Speed		- How fast is the unit going?
Destination	- Where is the unit going?
Location	- Where is the unit now?
Attack		- See rules of engagement
Retreat		- See rules of engagement
Follow		- See rules of engagement
Orders		- A list of orders that the unit is following

Rules of Engagement:

Each unit may be instructed on how to react when encountering an enemy unit.

Each unit has an 'Attack' setting which determines the conditions for firing at
an enemy unit. A value of 0 means the unit will never attack, and a value of
100 means the unit will fire at any enemy that is within range.

There is a 'Retreat' setting which determines conditions under which the unit
will retreat. A setting of 0 means the unit will never retreat, even in the
face of overwhelming force. A setting of 100 means the unit will retreat from
any enemy that it sees. A setting of 50 means it will retreat from any enemy
whose weapon strength is equal to or greater than the unit's armor.

There is also a 'Follow' setting which determines conditions for following a
retreating enemy unit. As in the other settings, 0 means never follow, and 100
means always follow. A setting of 50 means follow any enemy if the unit has a
weapon strength equal to or greater than the enemy's armor.

Sighting the enemy

When two opposing units (let's call them A and B) are within possible sight of
each other, a check is made to see if either unit can actually see the other
(based on stealth, camoflage, and height).

    If A can see B, A reports the sighting.
    The rules of enagement are checked for A.
    A may then attack, retreat, or follow.
    If A attacks and B survives, then B gets a chance to return fire
	(assuming B is within attack range. Return fire is allowed
	even if B cannot see A.)
    Then, a check is made to determine if B can see A.

    If B can see A, the process repeats for B.

Any reported sightings appear in the sightings window. If the sighting is the
same as a previous sighting, the time of the sighting is updated.

Reported sightings are also displayed on the map as red bordered white squares.

In the case of conflicting priorities, Retreating takes precedence over
Attacking, which takes precedence over Following.


Health

Health is a 0 to 100 scale. Health of 0 means the unit has been destroyed.
Health below 70 results in decreased speed, and health below 10 prevents the
unit from moving. Health below 50 reduces accuracy.

Armor and Weapon Strength

If armor is twice weapon strength, then the weapon will not cause any damage.
If the weapon strength is twice the armor, the unit will be destroyed.
Intermediate values will cause proportional loss of health.

Accuracy

Accuracy gives the probability of hitting a target at maximum range. If the
target is closer, the chance of hitting it is proportionally greater. At zero
range, the chance of hitting is 100%.

Terrain

The map display shows the landscape. There is a vertical scale on the right
hand side which shows the colors for different altitudes.

Altitude as two effects. First, altitude affects the speed of all ground-based
units. The lowest altitude areas (shown in blue) are swamps, and cause a 90%
reduction in speed. On dry ground, increasing altitude results in decreasing
speed.

The second effect is on vision. Altitude allows a unit to see farther. If two
units are at different altitudes, the higher unit has the advantage.

Selecting Units

There are several different ways to select groups of units to give orders,
check status, or to check orders. You may select all the units at a particular
location, all units of a particular type, all moving units, all stopped units,
or all units together. Regardless of how you make your selection, the selected
units will appear in a window called the 'Unit List'.

Selecting by location:

Point to a spot on the map menu and click the right button. An enlarged map of
this area will appear in another menu. Any location with one or more units will
have an 'X'. Click on any square with an 'X' and a Unit List window will appear
with the unit(s) at that location.

Selecting by type:

Click on the 'List' menu item and choose the category. All units in the
selected category will appear in the Unit List window.

Giving Orders:

Orders may be given to a single unit, or to groups of units. Orders will be
carried out in the same order that you give them.

To give orders, select the unit(s) from the Unit List window (see above). To
order the units to move, click the PATH button. Then click on one or more
points in the Map window. The units will travel to these points in the sequence
that you specify. When you are done with specifying the path, click the END
button on the unit list window.

To give other orders, click the ORDERS button on the unit list window. Select a
list of orders on the ORDERS window. When you have the list you want, click the
DONE button on the ORDERS window.

When you are finished with all moves and other orders, click DONE on the Unit
List window.

Signals
      
Units can be ordered to send or wait for signals. A signal is a number that is
broadcast to all units. For instance, you could order a group of tanks to move
to a position, and send signal 1. In the meantime you can instruct another
group to wait for signal 1, then change their attack level and move toward the
enemy.

Starting the game

When the empty map window appears, select either 'New' or 'Load' from the File
menu. If you select 'Load', a file dialog widow will appear. Select a saved
game.

If you have selected a new game, you will need to set up your delivery point
and main base.

The delivery point must be along either the top or the bottom edge, depending
which side you are. You may select any point on the map for your main base.
Once you select your main base, your General will be delivered. You must give
him orders to follow a path to your main base. All other units that you order
will be delivered with initial orders to follow this same path.

Click the 'Buy' choice on the main menu bar. A buying window will appear. In
this window, you may select units and quantities. You have a budget, and may
buy up to 50 units. There are two boxes in the top right corner. One shows your
remaining balance, and the other shows how many units you can buy before
reaching the limit of 50.

Select a unit type in the 'Unit' box, and enter a quantity in the 'Quantity'
box. The total cost will appear in the 'Total' box. If this is what you want,
click the 'OK' button. Your order will be placed in the order list. Your
balance will be updated.

If your order would exceed your remaining balance, or would exceed the limit of
50 units, then the quantity will be adjusted as the selection is added to the
order list.

You may delete a selection from the order list by clicking on the selection and
then clicking the 'Delete' button. Your balance and remaining units tally will
be adjusted.

Once your order is complete, click the 'Done' button. Your units will be
delivered.

At this point, you may click the 'Run' button to start the game. You may begin
giving your units orders. Note that your units will not follow any new orders
until they get to your main base.


